it's me Destin welcome back to smarter
every day when I make a video I normally
ask a question and have a pretty good
idea of where that question is going to
take me this one is way different we're
going to start in a weight room and
we're going to end up deep in the bowels
of Johnson Space Center where we meet a
lady who literally burns astronaut pee
we all know in space if an astronaut
sits around he's going to lose muscle
mass but earth is different when I lift
this weight it's actually weight so
here's my question how do astronauts
lift weights in space to learn the
answer to this let's go talk to
astronauts Don Pettit and Mike Hopkins
it doesn't look like you've been lifting
quite as much I have as this man over
here I'm Destin I just don't like Mike
nice to meet you in Mike you've uh
you're an expert at working out in space
right well I've spent some time working
out here on earth and I just took that
to space with me you take people like
Mike and I studs let's be clear studs
right people like Mike you know we're in
the middle of life we're healthy and we
go to station and we get disease like
symptoms instilled in our bodies from
any number of venues physiological
venues and and it's a great way to study
the effect of these sayings and what's
causing them and how to prevent them
some of these diseases we're talking
about take years to manifest here on
earth but up in space we'll see them in
months right weeks and so that's another
advantage of doing it up in Norman oh
that makes sense
and we're working right now this machine
which I like to call the beast everybody
calls it to a red which stands for what
uh you know advanced resistive exercise
s Ranaut's straight it takes some
special engineering thinking to make a
machine that allows you to wait lift in
a weightless environment before dr. Bob
explains how a red works I wanted to see
if I could figure this out my first
thought was to use a spring but the more
you compress a spring the more force is
required weight is a constant force so
that doesn't work I thought about the
same thing with elastic bands but
more you stretch them the more forces
requires that doesn't work either my
final thought was to use an air cylinder
if you plug one into the air cylinder
and you compressed it that would work up
to a point but as the volume decreases
pressure increases requiring more force
so how do they do it the heart of the
system are these two canisters right
here okay canisters contain a vacuum now
if we could look inside the canister
you'd see a piston that would slide you
know oh wait a second because a vacuum
never changes vacuum is always the same
as always so instead of pressurizing
here and pushing against something
you're just going to pull it the volume
of your vacuum is right here between the
piston and the top of the chamber okay
and when you pan down attached to the
piston is a rod it comes on down here
and attaches here and here okay and so
the vacuum always wants to pull those
rods up like a syringe like it's exactly
like a syringe okay this is really
clever think about it you've got a
cylinder a piston and the atmospheric
pressure all around if you push the
piston in all the way and then you close
the valve at the end and you pull you're
going to create a vacuum because the
normal air pressure on the inside of
station is pushing on the backside of
the piston it creates a force more
importantly a constant force this is
super simple and super clever so as the
vacuum pulls the Pistons up it forces
this arm down so Pistons go up arm goes
down and that's constant and so right
now the vacuum is holding this arm to
this upper stop when Mike stands up it
will release and now he's holding that
50 pounds in this example on his
shoulders
okay it's way more complicated and I
thought it was okay one more time please
money here we go going down going down
Jacky was pressing him down and now he's
standing up against the force of Edessa
this is just simple lever this is
Archimedes glass Don's right it's just a
lever if the vacuum is pulling up on one
side of the bar it's going to be pushing
down with a constant force on the other
another cool thing is that if you vary
the position of the fulcrum you can vary
the weight in fact they've got an easy
way to adjust that so a guy like me can
work out with guys like Mike and Don
okay Wow feels like weight it feels
exactly like weighted that's how is
design okay so here's a question so is
this all about muscle
it's about muscle okay it's about bones
what do you mean
bone density loading your skeletal
system I thought when you workout you're
working out because of your muscles who
you are you're also putting loads on
your skeletal system most notably the
hip area the spine area everything kind
of below the waist you don't use in
space so what is what is loading the
bone before you set bone density yes
loading the bone stimulates bone growth
okay so we want to minimize any losses
by stimulating the bones as much as we
can okay is that a big deal in space
it's a huge deal what what do you mean
it's a huge deal well without that you
can stand to lose two to two-and-a-half
percent of your bone density per month
Jerry said two to two and a half percent
per month that's crazy if you
extrapolate that out your bones are
going to be gone so after 30 months you
you have half your bone density possibly
but no one's ever I mean we don't send
people to the space station and not have
them exercise okay if it takes three
years to get to Mars and back a certain
percentage of your bone mineral density
loss every month is a huge deal
so I started pouring through the data
and I learned that the bulk of that bone
marrow density that's lost is lost in
the lower back in the hip and in the
femur and if you think about it that
makes sense because where did the
elderly most often break a bone so to
understand this even better I went to
the nutritional biochemistry lab there
Johnson Space Center and I learned that
the majority of those minerals are being
peed out of the astronauts bodies I'm
with dr. Scott Smith and you are part of
the nutritional biochemistry team here
at NASA Johnson Space license that's a
really nice logo Harvey I like that so I
noticed that you have pee on the counter
here why is this so important we learned
a nutritional biochemistry lab so we
look at biochemistry a lot of the work
that we do is focused on bone because
there's a lot of things in your body if
there's not things your diet that relate
to your bones so things like calcium and
other factors all affect your boat so
we're very interested in looking at
those things and the easiest way to do
that is by looking at blood samples and
urine samples your body is pretty smart
and it maintains the skeleton that you
need to do what you're doing what that
means is that you're forming as much
bone as you're breaking down it's like
this cycle and you're making bone and
you're losing it at the same time as
long as you're doing those two things at
the same rate
it all is good okay when you start doing
more one than the other is when you get
out of balance and this is 1-80 freezer
we've got another dozen or so upstairs
we've got another dozen or so two hours
away in a bunker that we protect them so
that if a hurricane gets here and the
power goes off we don't lose oh say are
you serious we press again it protects
the astronaut because like you wouldn't
believe
loss it is considered a national
treasure Astrid that's my goal in life
is for my PB considered if there's no
treasure it's it's not quite what the
moon is you're being serious because I
mean if you think about it like you
can't reproduce it because the amount of
money and taxpayer dollars that went
into creating that specific controlled
astronaut fee is irreplaceable that's
correct if you want Anna's here I'm
going to this it is running urine
calcium's right now really so and you're
taking the urine and you're putting it
in the machine yes I'm
how does it feel to know that a national
treasure is in your hands that national
treasure being hashed or not you're in
it's really something special what a
great way to answer that question this
is looking at urinary calcium so you're
saying that that's where the bone mass
goes they pee they pee out their bones
they pee you propose whoa there's a fire
going on in here you didn't tell me that
what's up with the fire the machine
injects a sample into that flame okay
and then as it burns what happens is the
Machine measures the the absorption of
light and based on standards and curves
you're looking at it absorbs different
wavelengths from that heat and tells you
whether counselors there's a lot of big
words happen right here but I wants to
stop and think about what's actually
happening we're taking astronaut pee and
we're burning it and we're looking at
the color of burnt astronaut pee that
correct that's correct in crew members
of the a red when they came back when we
looked at their x-rays their bone
mineral density was the same as it was
before flow and that's never happened
before that's never happened before with
good diet and hard exercise this is the
percent change per month in whole body
bone mineral density okay in crew
members on the mirror with it end of any
resistive exercise crewmembers early on
station where they had the I read and
crew members with a red boom can't go to
Mars can't go to Mars you can go to Mars
theoretically yes because of a red again
there's still questions about the
strength and I get it but let's go to
Mars seriously that's that's like that
data is very very clear another thing
that's really cool about this research
is that all these papers that are being
cranked out by the biochemistry lab at
NASA are not just applicable to space in
the future these lessons about diet and
skeletal loading will also to help
people like my granny who's currently
recovering from a broken hip and to me
that's a huge deal okay I hope you
enjoyed this episode of smarter every
day smarter every day is sponsored by
audible.com in this
is the book I want you to get it's
called packing for Mars by Mary Roach I
listen to this thing on the way out to
Houston it's a really really good book I
enjoyed it a lot it's about all the
weird things that the human body does
when you put it in space what happens to
all the stuff that your skin excretes
how does your body detect blood pressure
how is that effect
affected by the gravity vector it's all
kinds of weird stuff human bodies do you
know crude things so you're not going to
want to listen to this around the kids I
cannot recommend this enough packing for
Mars by Mary Roach you can get that for
free at audible.com/smarter I think
you'll like it
also feel free to check out the rest of
the space series if you feel like this
episode earned your subscription feel
free to do that or even support on
patreon but only if it earned it anyway
thank you so much for watching I'm
Destin you're getting smarter every day
have a good one
Wow feels like weight it feels exactly
like weighted that's how it was design
so I can feel the inertia from this
wobble yeah those little details are
really important when you get in a
weightless environment holy cow
it feels like I've got way too much rope
that's it and it just shows that what
engineers can do when they're given a
challenging project and you give them
free rein to come up with a design like
I don't like lifting weights and I'm
already sad it's amazing